Explanations about DPoS and voting - Closes #558 (#723)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/explanations/consensus.adoc

NOTE: The DPoS used by Lisk is in fact more of a middle way between PoS and DPoS, as it also requires delegates to hold and lock a certain amount of tokens in their account.

In order to receive votes from other users, a user needs to register their account as <<register, delegate>>.

[[forging]]
=== Forging

The process of adding new blocks to a blockchain that uses the PoS or DPoS consensus algorithm is called forging.

Users can <<register,register as delegates>>, and increase their <<weight,delegate weight>> in order to reach forging positions.

The process of forging hardly consumes any energy and is therefore an extremely *energy-friendly* consensus algorithm compared to "mining", which is the analog process for blockchains that run with Proof of Work (PoW).

The 101 delegates with the highest <<weight,delegate weight>> and 2 additional standby delegates are selected to forge during a forging round.
During a forging round, delegates forge blocks one after another in a designated order.

The order in which the selected delegates forge new blocks is random and not connected to the delegate weight.

[NOTE]
====

> During a forging round, no new calculations need to be done, which makes the process so efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During a forging round, no new calculations are required which makes the process highly efficient.
```

> This allows a very energy efficient process of adding new blocks, which enables to run forging nodes even on very weak machines, like a Raspberry Pi.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This technique enables a very energy efficient process of adding new blocks, which allows forging nodes to run even on machines with very limited processing capabilities, such as a Raspberry Pi.
```

====

....
101(amount of the forging delegates) + 2(random standby delegates) = 103(Number of blocks of a forging round)
....

After a forging round is completed, the delegate selection process starts again and assigns the delegates to their forging positions.

[[weight]]
==== Delegate weight

> The delegate weight is defined like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The delegate weight is defined as shown below:
```

....
delegate weight = minimum { 10 * delegate self-vote , sum of all votes for the delegate }
....

Where `delegate self-vote` is the amount the delegate voted for its own account.
Note that the `sum of all votes for the delegate` includes the self-votes.

[[register]]
=== Registering as delegate

> All accounts in the network can register as delegate by sending a delegate registration transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All accounts in the network can register as a delegate by sending a delegate registration transaction.
```

The chosen delegate name has to be unique in the network.

> Once an account is registered as delegate, it is possible for other accounts in the network to vote for this delegate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once an account is registered as a delegate, it is possible for other accounts in the network to vote for this delegate.
```

.Example: Creating a delegate registration transaction
[source,js]
----
const tx =  new transactions.DelegateTransaction({
    asset:{
        username: 'myDelegateName'
    },
    nonce: '1',
    fee: '1500000000'
});
----

More information about the delegate selection mechanism can be found in the xref:{url_protocol_delegate_selection}[Lisk Protocol].

=== Voting for a delegate

Accounts can vote for delegates by locking tokens in their account.
After unvoting a delegate the locked tokens can be unlocked again through the unlock transaction.

> Lets assume you hold an account with a balance of 100 tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, lets assume you hold an account with a balance of 100 tokens.
```

You could use only a part of your tokens for voting, but let's assume you want to vote with all 100.

> It is of course possible to split your tokens among multiple delegates, or to use all to vote for only one delegate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is of course possible to split your tokens among multiple delegates, or to use all of them to vote for only one delegate.
```

> For example you could use it to vote for 10 delegates with 10 tokens, or on one delegate with the full 100 tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example you could use it to vote for 10 delegates with 10 tokens, or alternatively just on one delegate with the full 100 tokens.
```

In the example below we decide to vote for one delegate with 70 tokens, and for another one with 30 tokens.

.Example: Vote for two delegates
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.VoteTransaction({
    asset:{
        votes: [
            { delegateAddress:'11750255083444888021L', amount: '7000000000'}, <1>
            { delegateAddress:'64373847834494888026L', amount: '3000000000'} <2>
        ]
    }
});
----

<1> Locks 70 tokens and adds 70 tokens delegate weight to the delegate with address `11750255083444888021L`.
<2> Locks 30 tokens and adds 30 tokens delegate weight to the delegate with address `64373847834494888026L`.

[[unlock]]
=== Unvoting delegates and unlocking of tokens

The amount of tokens used for voting is locked and cannot be used for any other transactions.
This includes but is not limited to balance transfers, further voting or fees.

> To use those tokens, the account has to submit a xref:{url_protocol_transactions_vote}[delegate vote transaction] with a negative amount (also called “unvote”).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use those tokens, the account has to submit a xref:{url_protocol_transactions_vote}[delegate vote transaction], with a negative amount (also called “unvote”).
```

> This will start the unlocking procedure and the LSK will be ready for unlock 2000 blocks later (roughly 5 hours and 30 minutes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will start the unlocking procedure and the LSK will be ready for unlocking 2000 blocks later (roughly 5 hours and 30 minutes).
```

To recover the locked tokens, the account has to submit two transactions.

. First, the tokens have to be unvoted.
This is done with a new `VoteTransaction`, the transaction just needs to contain a negative amount.
The tokens are now in an “unlocking” state.
They have been unvoted but are not usable yet.
+
.Example: Unvote a delegate
[source,js]
----
const tx = new transactions.VoteTransaction({
    asset:{
        votes: [
            { delegateAddress:'64373847834494888026L', amount: '-1500000000'} // 15 tokens can be unlocked in 2000 blocks
        ]
    },
    nonce: '2',
    fee: '250000'
});
----
+
. After a 2000 block period, the tokens can be unlocked.
This is done with a new `UnlockTransaction`.
The xref:{url_protocol_transactions_unlock}[token unlock transaction] specifies which tokens have to be unlocked and added back to the balance.
This mechanism is necessary to allow blocks to be reverted.

> Future improvements of the Lisk blockchain (particularly on the database level) could render this unlock transaction unnecessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future improvements of the Lisk blockchain (particularly on the database level), could render this unlock transaction unnecessary.
```
